---
title: "A Short Intro to Scala"
description: "A small introduction to programming in Scala."
head.image: "/neko.png"
date: "2022-05-29"
---

# Introduction to Scala

::Message{type="error"}
*This is meant to be a simple overview of Scala. We will not go deep into many concepts.*
*In case you want to go deeper, check out the [Scala Book](https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/book/introduction.html)*
::

Scala is a modern programming language that supports object-oriented and functional programming. 
It runs on the JVM. It is a statically-typed language designed to address the criticisms of Java.

## Features
- It is a high level programming language.
- It supports a fusion of functional and object-oriented programming.
- It is statically typed.
- It runs seamlessly with Java.
- It can be run on the browser by integrating with JavaScript.
- It has a concise and readable syntax.

## Hello World

Create a file named `hello.scala` and add the following content to it.

::CodeGroup{labels="Scala 2;Scala 3"}
 :::CodeBlock{label="Scala 2" active}
 ```scala
  object HelloWorld {
    def main(args: Array[String]) = {
      println("Hello, World!");
    }
  }
 ```
 :::

 :::CodeBlock{label="Scala 3"}
 ```scala
  @main def HelloWorld() = println("Hello, World!");
 ```
 :::
::

The above program can be compiled using the following command from a terminal
assuming you have already installed Scala.

```s
$ scalac hello.scala
```

You will now see a lot of files in the working directory. 
This indicates that the program has been compiled.
The compiled program can be run using the following command:

```s
$ scala HelloWorld
```

The `HelloWorld` can be replaced with whatever you named your main object (Scala 2) or main function (Scala 3) as.

Ta-dah! You have run your (probably) first Scala program.

Scala programs generally follow the structure used above, depending on the version of Scala you use.

## The REPL

Like many modern programming language runtimes, Scala provides a **REPL** (Read-Evaluate-Print-Loop)
via the command line that can be accessed through the `scala` command.

```r
$ scala
Welcome to Scala 2.13.8 (OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM, Java 17.0.4.1).
Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.

scala> _ 
```

You can evaluate simple expressions via the REPL.

```r
$ scala
Welcome to Scala 2.13.8 (OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM, Java 17.0.4.1).
Type in expressions for evaluation. Or try :help.

scala> println("Hello World");
Hello World

scala> _
```