---
title: "More on Functions in Scala"
description: "An overview on other concepts on functions in Scala."
head.image: "/neko.png"
date: "2022-05-29"
---

# More on Functions in Scala

In this article, we shall see about two concepts:

- Lambda Functions (Anonymous Functions)
- Higher-order Functions

As already mentioned, Scala supports both **object-oriented** and **functional** programming.
This article covers a bit of functional programming concepts.

All functions in Scala are values, just like any other `String` or `Int`.

## Lambda (Anonymous) Functions

Anonymous functions are functions that do not have a name. They are used to
help keep code concise and readable.

You might already be using lambda functions without knowing about them.

```scala
val items = Seq(1, 2, 3, 4);

val even = items.filter(x => x % 2 == 0); 
// x => x % 2 == 0 is our lambda function.
```

In the above example, we are passing a nameless function with one parameter
`x` which checks whether `x % 2`{lang="ts"} is 0 and returns true or false.

This nameless function is a lambda.

What is its use? Exactly what you see. They are used in places where you
need to pass a function as a parameter.

By the way, functions that accept these anonymous functions as parameters are
higher-order functions.

## Higher-order Functions

These functions either accept other functions as parameters or return a function
as a result.

Here's an example:

```scala
def DoubleThis(fn: T => Boolean): Int
```

Here, `T` is a generic type inferred from the value of `p` supplied.

Since this function accepts a function `p` as a parameter, it is a HOF.

Example:

```scala
def TrueOrFalse(n: Int): Boolean = {
  return if(n < 0) false else true;
}

def RunThisFunctionOnOne(fn: Int => Boolean) = {
  val result = fn(1);
  if(result == true) println("This is true");
  else println("This is false");
}

RunThisFunctionOnOne(TrueOrFalse);

```

In this example, we are passing the `TrueOrFalse` function as a parameter
to `RunThisFunctionOnOne`.

Let us see an example with a lambda.

```scala
def RunThisFunctionOnOne(fn: Int => Boolean) = {
  val result = fn(1);
  if(result == true) println("This is true");
  else println("This is false")
}

RunThisFunctionOnOne(n => if(n < 0) false else true);

```

Common examples of HOFs you'd use commonly are methods like `filter`, `find`,
`map`, `foreach`, etc., that are found on collections.

### Function Types

Let us look into how function types are defined.

```scala
val addTwoItems: (Int, Int) => Int = (a, b) => a + b;
```

Here, `(Int, Int)`{lang="scala"} is a list of parameter types.

`=> Int`{lang="scala"} says that the function will return another
integer.

`= (a, b) => a + b`{lang="scala"} is the actual lambda function.

## Implicits & Givens

Scala provides `givens` (`implicit` in Scala 2)

::Alert{type="danger"}
*TODO: Write about implicits and givens*
::